Add architecture.md (#4611)
pymc-devs/pymc: ARCHITECTURE.md

# Architecture

This document describes the high-level architecture of PyMC3.
If you want to familiarize yourself with the code base, you are just in the right place!

# Bird's Eye View

![Architecture](docs/Architecture.png)

On the highest level, PyMC3 lets you define probabilistic graphs or models
that can be easily used to compute log probabilities for posterior inference

> or to draw random samples for prior and posterior prediction. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or to draw random samples from priors or posteriors. 
```

However there are numerous
other useful sets of functionality, from prior and posterior predictive sampling,
GraphviZ model, as well as various helper functions.

> PyMC3 includes a couple of posterior estimation techniqes in particular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PyMC3 includes a few inference techniques, in particular:
```

> * MCMC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Markov chain Monte Carlo 
```

* Variational Inference
* Sequential Monte Carlo

The most relevant modules of PyMC3 are shown visually below, as well as their
relation to other major packages. Not all modules are shown, either because
they are smaller or self explanatory in scope, or they're pending
deprecation

## Functionality not in PyMC3
It it easier to start with functionality that is not present in PyMC3 but
rather deferred to outside libraries. If seeking to understand any 
of the topics below refer to that specific library

### Aesara
* Gradient computation
* Random number generation
* Low level tensor operation definition
* Low level operation graphs

### ArviZ

> * Plotting e.g. Traceplot, rankplots, posterior plots
> * Diagnostics e.g. Rhat, Effective Sample Size, Leave One Out comparison

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Plotting e.g. Trace plots, rank plots, posterior plots
* MCMC sampling diagnostics e.g. Rhat, Effective Sample Size.
* Model comparison, particularly efficient leave-one-out cross-validation approximation
```

* Inference Data structure

# Modules

> The codebase of PyMC3 is split among single python file modules at the root
> level, as well as directories with python code for logical groups of functionality.
> Admittedly the split is a slightly arbitrary. For this guide modules are 
> detailed in the order that a normal user would typically encounter them during
> a nominal workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The codebase of PyMC3 is split among single Python file modules at the root
level, as well as directories with Python code for logical groups of functionality.
Admittedly the split is a slightly arbitrary. For this guide modules are 
detailed in the order that a normal user would typically encounter them during
a nominal workflow
```

# Architecture

This document describes the high-level architecture of PyMC3.
If you want to familiarize yourself with the code base, you are just in the right place!

# Bird's Eye View

TODO: Update diagram to include SMC

> ![Architecture](docs/Architecture.png)

Reviewer 2: I would try to show the most important dependencies in the image. Maybe something like distributions, gp and ode are used to "build" models, then samplers take a model and a step method to generate samples (and store these samples in a backend which seems to be missing but I'm not sure if its missing or backends are gone in v4). More nuance can then be added in the text and in the developer guide. 

Working on this more hierarchical image (like working on this doc) can help better define what and why should be a module/submodule, even how to structure the API doc page.

Reviewer 2: The image could even be graphviz generated with each node being a link to the right section/respective api page if someone is up for the task.

References: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/graphviz.html and https://jhermann.github.io/blog/python/documentation/2020/03/25/sphinx_ext_graphviz.html

or to draw random samples from priors or posteriors. 
However there are numerous
other useful sets of functionality, from prior and posterior predictive sampling,
GraphviZ model, as well as various helper functions.

PyMC3 includes a few inference techniques, in particular:
* Markov chain Monte Carlo 
* Variational Inference
* Sequential Monte Carlo

The most relevant modules of PyMC3 are shown visually below, as well as their
relation to other major packages. Not all modules are shown, either because
they are smaller or self explanatory in scope, or they're pending
deprecation

## Functionality not in PyMC3
It is easier to start with functionality that is not present in PyMC3 but
rather deferred to outside libraries. If seeking to understand any 
of the topics below refer to that specific library

### Aesara
* Gradient computation
* Random number generation
* Low level tensor operation definition
* Low level operation graphs

### ArviZ
* Plotting e.g. Trace plots, rank plots, posterior plots
* MCMC sampling diagnostics e.g. Rhat, Effective Sample Size.
* Model comparison, particularly efficient leave-one-out cross-validation approximation
* Inference Data structure

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe also add some mentions of honor for bambi/sunode/...? 

They are more user-facing than dev-facing, and I don't think that there is any part of the codebase needing or being specific to them, but it could be helpful in 1) understanding why there isn't a glm module and 2) seeing if some few feature should be a new module or a new library instead.

Author: Leaving this open as maybe, I think those are related libraries but dont directly affect the architecture. Aesara for sure does, ArviZ does as well since its a hard requirement of pymc

Author: Been thinking about this more. Theres two things
* In regards to related packages  I dont think architecture.md is the right place for this. There shoould be perhaps some other page that links out to all the things built on top of pymc3 like xarray does here http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/ecosystem.html
* In regards to "why things arent here" like glm, I dont think this is useful either, especially if we have the above doc

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I'm not sure if here is the best place, but I feel we should have something related to this somewhere. Not so much on "why things aren't there" but on how to decide if a new feature should be a new module or a new library. If there are any other0 than developer convenience

A 3rd party packages/ecosyste. page like matplotlib or xarray have would be amazing cc @martinaca

Author: I agree that figuring out whether something should be new library or new module is an architectural decision. I have two questions when thinking about this

1. Given half of the answer is dependent on what the other thing is, would we be able to effectively answer that question in this doc.
2. Should this document just be what the existing architecture is, and not attempt to answer how it should evolve, or what it isnt?

I really dont have answers to the above question but curious to hear anything

# Modules
The codebase of PyMC3 is split among single Python file modules at the root
level, as well as directories with Python code for logical groups of functionality.
Admittedly the split between single `.py` module or directory is not defined by a strict
criteria but tends to occur when single `.py` files would be "too big".
We will with the modules needed for a "simple MCMC" model
before detailing the remaining modules, such as Variational Inference, Ordinary Differential Equations,
or Sequential Monte Carlo.

> ## [model.py](https://docs.pymc.io/api/model.html#module-pymc3.model)

Reviewer 2: I think this should be referenced as 

```suggestion
## {mod}`pymc3.model`
```

or with `` {mod}`model.py <pymc3.model>` `` to keep the same text.

This module contains pieces of code related to model definition and evaluation of the model.
In no particular order they are

* `ContextMeta`: The context manager that enables the `with pm.Model() as model` syntax

> * `Factor`: Defines the methods for the various logprobs for models

Reviewer 2: Similar thing here

```suggestion
* {class}`~pymc3.Factor`: Defines the methods for the various logprobs for models
```

will generate a hyperlink to the right api page. See https://arviz-devs.github.io/arviz/contributing/developer_guide.html#hyperlinks for more details.

Admittedly the split between single `.py` module or directory is not defined by a strict
criteria but tends to occur when single `.py` files would be "too big".
We will with the modules needed implement "simple MCMC" model shown below
before detailing the remaining modules, such as Variational Inference, Ordinary Differential Equations,
or Sequential Monte Carlo.

```python
with pm.Model() as model:
  theta = pm.Beta("theta", alpha=1, beta=2)
  p = pm.Beta("n", p=theta, n=2, observed=[1,2])
  inf_data = pm.sample()

```

## {mod}`pymc3.model`
Contains primitives related model definition and methods used for evaluation of the model.
In no particular order they are

* `ContextMeta`: The context manager that enables the `with pm.Model() as model` syntax
* {class}`~pymc3.Factor`: Defines the methods for the various logprobs for models
* `ValueGrad` which handles the value and gradient and is the main connection point to Aesara
* `Deterministic` and `Potential`: Definitions for two pieces of functionality useful in some model definitions

## distributions/
Contains multiple submodules that define distributions,  as well as logic that aids in distributions usage.

> Currently this module also contains functionality that enables specific model architectures such as BART and Time Series.

Reviewer: I do not think BART is a "model architecture", instead is a distribution over the space of trees (step-wise functions). I agree is a "weird" distribution because we use data (to define the splits and to get its shape), but this is more about practical convenience. To define a model using BART you need to combine it, at least with one more distribution for the likelihood, so BART is not a model by itself. I think a similar argument applies to time-series.

Author: Thanks for comment removed

If you want to familiarize yourself with the code base, you are just in the right place!

# Bird's Eye View

![Architecture](docs/Architecture.png)

> On the highest level, PyMC3 is a thing which lets you define probabilistic graphs or models

Reviewer 3: Let's you define probabilistic graphs or models that can be easily used to compute log probabilities for posterior inference or to draw random samples for prior and posterior prediction. (Suggestion)

Author: Done
